Upgrade note for metadata-building changes (#25427)
gradle/gradle: subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/migration/upgrading_version_8.adoc

A plugin compiled with Gradle >= 8.2 that makes use of the Kotlin DSL functions link:{kotlinDslPath}/gradle/org.gradle.kotlin.dsl/the.html[`Project.the<T>()`], link:{kotlinDslPath}/gradle/org.gradle.kotlin.dsl/the.html[`Project.the(KClass)`] or link:{kotlinDslPath}/gradle/org.gradle.kotlin.dsl/configure.html[`Project.configure<T> {}`] cannot run on Gradle <= 6.1.

> ==== Lazier construction of `RootComponentMetadata`
> 
> During resolution, when Gradle constructs root `ComponentMetadata` objects it now does so more lazily, without causing tasks that create artifacts to be realized.
> This can change the timing of when certain attributes are added to a `Configuration`, such as the `LibraryElements` attribute added by internal methods of the `java` plugin.
> 
> If your build relies on modifying this or other attributes added by a Gradle core plugin, you should double-check that your modifications are still applied at the right time for your use cases.
> 
> We recommend not modifying attributes on Gradle-created configurations to avoid being surprised by implementation changes in internal behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Deferred or avoided configuration of some tasks

When performing dependency resolution, Gradle creates an internal representation of the available link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/artifacts/Configuration.html[Configuration]s. This required inspecting all configurations and all artifacts. Processing artifacts created by tasks would cause those tasks to be realized and configured.

This internal representation is now created more lazily, which can cause changes to the order that tasks are configured. Some tasks may never be configured. 

This change may cause code paths that relied on a particular order to no longer function, such as conditionally adding attributes to a configuration based on the presence of certain attributes.

This impacted the link:https://github.com/bndtools/bnd/issues/5695[bnd plugin and JUnit5 build].

We recommend not modifying domain objects (configurations, source sets, tasks, etc) from configuration blocks for other domain objects that may not be configured. 
```

Reviewer 2: I will review the final version.

A plugin compiled with Gradle >= 8.2 that makes use of the Kotlin DSL functions link:{kotlinDslPath}/gradle/org.gradle.kotlin.dsl/the.html[`Project.the<T>()`], link:{kotlinDslPath}/gradle/org.gradle.kotlin.dsl/the.html[`Project.the(KClass)`] or link:{kotlinDslPath}/gradle/org.gradle.kotlin.dsl/configure.html[`Project.configure<T> {}`] cannot run on Gradle <= 6.1.

==== Deferred or avoided configuration of some tasks

> When performing dependency resolution, Gradle creates an internal representation of the available link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/artifacts/Configuration.html[Configuration]s. This required inspecting all configurations and all artifacts. Processing artifacts created by tasks would cause those tasks to be realized and configured.

Reviewer 3: 🧐 One sentence per line please

Author: I'm getting these into a separate PR, since this one already merged.

> When performing dependency resolution, Gradle creates an internal representation of the available link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/artifacts/Configuration.html[Configuration]s. This required inspecting all configurations and all artifacts. Processing artifacts created by tasks would cause those tasks to be realized and configured.

Author: I'm getting these into a separate PR, since this one already merged.
